---
layout: default
title: Null Reference Is Not a Mistake
---



The null pointer is considered to be a “[billion-dollar mistake](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Null-References-The-Billion-Dollar-Mistake-Tony-Hoare)” by Tony Hoare, but was he really saying that null pointer should never be used? After years of using languages both with null pointers (e.g. Java) and without them (e.g. Haskell), I found that null pointers are much easier and more natural to use than its counterparts (e.g. Haskell’s Maybe type). I have been wondering why there is such a notion of “billion-dollar mistake” until I saw the original video where Tony Hoare claims it to be his mistake. In fact, he didn’t really say that null pointer should not be used, so I realized that I made a mistake by taking the words “billion-dollar mistake” literally.

From this video, you can see that introducing null reference is not really a mistake. On the contrary, null references are helpful and sometimes indispensable (consider how much trouble if you may or may not return a string in C++). The mistake really is not in the existence of the null pointers, but in how the type system handles them. Unfortunately most languages (C++, Java) don’t handle them correctly.

Every class type A of Java is in fact a union type {A, null}, because you can use null anywhere an object of class A is expected. This is equivalent to the Maybe type of Haskell (where null in Java corresponds to Nothing of Haskell). So the trouble really is that an annotation like {String, null} should be distinguished from String, so that it will be clear what can possibly end up in the value. Unfortunately, most languages don’t provide a convenient union type that you can put String and null together (Typed Racket is an exception). If Java is to have union types, we can say something like:

    {String, null} findName1() {
      if (...) {
        return "okay";
      } else {
        return null;
      }
    }

This is saying: findName may return a name which is a String, or it may return nothing. In comparison, we can say something slightly different:

    String findName2() {
        ...
        return "okay";
    }

By distinguishing the return types of `findName1()` and `fineName2()`, the type system knows that you should check for null when you have called `findName1()`, but you don’t need to check for null if you call `findName2()`. So you have to write something like:

    String s = findName1();  
    if (s != null) {
      x = s.length();      // use s as a String only after null check
    }

But you may write:

    String s = findName2();
    x = s.length();

For the latter, you don’t have to check whether s is null because we know definitely that `findName2()` will return a String which is not null.

In fact this approach is hinted by Tony Hoare in the above video at 00:24.00. He said that null should be a class. Indeed, the union type {String, null} certainly thinks of null to be at the same status of String – it is a class. But we soon realize that it doesn’t really matter whether null is a class or not since the class Null will have only one value — null. So any language with null references should work equally well given a correct type system.

Static analysis tools such Coverity can already help alleviate this issue by essentially inferring the union types like {String, null} even when the programmers write String instead, although a type annotation system which allows the programmers to specify union types directly certainly makes type checking easier and also makes programs easier to read.