---
layout: default
title: What's wrong with OOP and FP
---


I don’t understand why there are endless debates about Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) and Functional Programming (FP). It seems that this type of thing is at the limits of human intelligence, so you can argue about them for centuries. Over the years of doing programming languages research, I have seen the answer clearly, so I often find it pointless debating with people on these issues. In short, both OOP and FP are wrong when you go to the extreme. The extreme of OOP is the notion _everything_ is an object. The extreme of FP is a _purely_ functional language.

### What’s wrong with OOP

OOP is wrong because of its definition of an “object”, and its attempt of trying to fit everything into it. When that goes to the extreme, you arrive at the notion “everything is an object”. But this notion is wrong, because

> There exist things that are not objects. Functions are not objects.

You may argue that in Python or Scala, functions are also objects. In Python, every object with the method `__call__` is a function. Likewise, in Scala, functions are just objects with a method named apply. But after some careful thought, you will see that this is confusing the fundamental with the derived. `__call__` and apply are themselves the "function objects" you are trying to define in the first place. Python and Scala just kidnapped the functions, jailed them into "objects", labeled them `__call__` and `apply`, and then call them "methods". Of course, when you wrap a function into a object, you can use the object like a function, but this doesn't mean you can say “functions are also objects”.

Most OO languages also lack correct implementations of first-class functions. An extreme is Java, which doesn’t allow functions to be passed as data at all. You can always wrap functions into objects and call them “methods”, but as I said, that’s kidnapping. The lack of first-class functions is the major reason why there are so many “design patterns” in Java. Once you have first-class functions, you will need almost none of the design patterns.

### What’s wrong with FP

Similarly, FP is wrong when you get to its extreme, a purely functional language . To discuss the topic, it is better to first have a good understanding what is a purely functional language. For this, you may want to read _[What is a Purely Functional Language](http://people.csse.uwa.edu.au/~arran/key_papers/Sabry%20-%201998%20-%20What%20is%20a%20purely%20functional%20language.pdf)_ by Amr Sabry (who was my PhD advisor). But in short, a purely functional language is wrong because

> There exist things that are not pure. Side-effects are very real.

Being purely functional is basically ignoring the capabilities provided by the physical substrate (silicon chips, quantum chips or whatever). Instead, purely functional languages try to re-implement the universe in functions by passing the universe in and out. But there is a difference between the physical and the simulated . “side-effects” are physical. They truly exist in nature and are indispensable for computation to be efficient. Simulating them with pure functions is doomed to be inefficient, complicated and even ugly. Have you noticed how easy it is to implement circular data structures or random number generators in C? The same is not true for Haskell.

Also purely functional languages cause a huge cognitive cost. If you look deep into them, monads make programs complicated and hard to write, and monad transformers are just ugly hacks. They are in the same spirit of “Java design patterns”. Have you noticed how many easy things in other languages become research problems when you try to write them in Haskell? So you often see papers titled like “A Monadic Approach to a-solved-problem”. Interestingly, Amr Sabry coauthored such a paper . The story was, he tried to reimplement Dan Friedman’s miniKanren in Haskell, but couldn’t figure out how to compose the monads. He had to seek help from Oleg Kiselyov, arguably the world’s most knowledgeable person about Haskell’s type system. And if you don’t know, Amr Sabry is probably the world’s most knowledgeable person about purely functional programming languages. They coauthored a [paper](http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/monads.html#LogicT) after solving the problem with Oleg’s help. Ironically, Dan Friedman, the original author of that piece of code, didn’t have any such trouble writing it in Scheme.

Some people claim that the value of monads is that they “delimit” the side-effects. But what’s the use of the delimiting if monads don’t really make your program easier to analyze or safer? In fact, they don’t. It is just as hard to analyze as if you use side-effects. There is no such thing monads can make easier which can’t be done by static analysis. Every static analysis researcher knows this. Static analyses use what is essentially monads, and they take the burden of writing monadic code away from programmers, instead of imposing it on them. Of course overusing side-effects will make programs harder to analyze, but you can also write pure functions in C, for example:

    int f(int x) { 
        int y = 0; int z = 0; y = 2 * x; z = y + 1; return z / 3;
    } 

You can do the same with assembly language too. Pure functions don’t just belong to purely functional languages. You can write pure functions in any language, but the important thing is, you should be allowed to use side-effects too.
 
Looking back into history, the idealism from mathematics is the driving force behind purely functional languages. Mathematical functions are simple and beautiful, but unfortunately they work well only when the thing you are trying to model is pure by nature. Otherwise it becomes ugly. Don’t be frightened by buzzwords like “category theory”. I know a considerable amount of category theory. Even the category theorists themselves call it “abstract nonsense”, because it is basically a grotesque way of saying what you already know! If you read Gottlob Frege’s article _[Function and concept](http://www.olimon.org/uan/frege-writings.pdf)_, you will be surprised that most mathematicians got functions wrong before his writing, and that was just a little more than a hundred years ago. In fact, mathematics have done so many things wrong with its language, especially in things like calculus. There is no reason programming language designers should blindly learn from mathematics.

### Don’t fall in love with you model

Everything starts to do harm when they are pursued to the extreme. When going to the extremes, both OOP and FP try to fit the world into their peculiar models, but the world works in a way completely independent of what we think. It is wrong to think of everything as a nail when you have a hammer. Only by observing the reality can we get out of the religions that are limiting us.

> Don’t fit the world to your model. Fit your model to the world.