---
layout: default
title: How to make programs and societies simple
---



We often heard of the “KISS” principle, which means “Keep It Simple, Stupid”, but simplicity is easier said than done. Ironically, there doesn’t seem to be a simple way of following this seemingly simple principle. Over the years of studying programming languages, logics and program analysis, I gained some insights of keeping programs simple, so now I’m going to share the most important trick I have learned.
What makes programs complicated

To understand the trick of making programs simple, it may be a good idea to understand what makes programs complicated.

Complexity means “entropy”, and entropy roughly means “number of choices to make”. If you write a function which handles too many kinds (types) of input, you are very likely to make it complicated.

A good source of complication is trying to make sense out of nonsense. For example, if you write a function which returns the first character of a string, but somebody calls it with a null pointer, what do you do? If your first reaction is to “gracefully” handle the null pointer, then you are very likely to make the function complicated. What’s the first character of a null pointer? It just doesn’t make any sense. If you insist on producing some output, you are likely to return some other nonsense (possibly another null pointer) to your caller. Thus nonsense starts to propagate and accumulate.

Many modern programming languages provide an “exception mechanism”, which allows you to “recover” from exception conditions such as null pointers etc. Be very careful about using those recovery mechanisms. Whenever not sure, don’t try to recover. By recovering from such nonsensical conditions, you are allowing more nonsense to come through.
Insist strictly on your principles, crash when violated

So what’s a better way of handling this situation of nonsensical input? CRASH! Don’t do anything, just crash as bad as you can. In our example, crashing will make the caller (which may be yourself) understand that you will never accept null pointers as input, and this will effectively reduce the likelihood that they call the function with nonsensical input.

Your function should keep its “principles” and insist on accepting only the things that make sense. It is NOT your responsibility of paying for your caller’s mistake.

That’s it? Right, that’s the most important trick of keeping programs simple I have learned over the years.
Catch exceptions and stop

So what do you do with exceptions such as Java’s IOException etc? I have a utility function called abort, and here is a typical example how I “catch” Java’s exceptions.
o
    try {         
        // do something which may throw exceptions     
    } catch (Exception e) {
        abort("Failed to ...");
    }

Do nothing to recover. Just give a message and exit. Because without this operation being correctly performed, doing everything else is nonsense. Passing the exception on will just cause the caller to add more nonsense to it and make things even more complicated.

For this reason Java’s exception mechanism is almost useless to me. It just makes the code a little uglier.
Applications to the society

The programming trick above also has an interesting implication of how to keep a society simple and carefree.

As functioning parts of the society, it is important that we keep our principles. Some societies are overly complicated because their people tend to be lenient on their “input”. The result is a society where nobody obeys traffic rules and laws are hard to enforce.

So the same trick in programming should be applicable to societies. By bravely keeping your principles and not cooperating with people who violate them, you are making the society simpler and better.